---
title: "Decision-Making for Autonomous Vehicles with Interaction-Aware Behavioral Prediction and Social-Attention Neural Network"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-10-31-TCST2024
---
<p class="page__date"><strong><i class="fa fa-fw fa-calendar" aria-hidden="true"></i> {{ site.data.ui-text[site.locale].date_label | default: "Published:" }}</strong> <time datetime="{{ post.date | default: "1900-01-01" | date_to_xmlschema }}">{{ post.date | default: "1900-01-01" | date: "%B %d, %Y" }}</time></p>

<i><b>Xiao Li</b>,  Kaiwen Liu</i>, <a href="https://vodca.engin.umich.edu/" target="_blank"><i>H Eric Tseng</i></a>, <a href="https://vodca.engin.umich.edu/" target="_blank"><i>Anouck Girard</i></a>, <a href="https://sites.google.com/a/umich.edu/kolmanovsky/" target="_blank"><i>Prof. Ilya Kolmanovsky</i></a>

Autonomous vehicles, as players in real-world traffic, need to accomplish their tasks while interacting with human drivers. It's crucial to equip the autonomous vehicle with artificial reasoning to better comprehend the intentions of the surrounding traffic, thereby facilitating their accomplishments of the tasks. In this work, we proposed a behavioral model that encodes drivers' interacting intentions into latent social-psychological parameters. Leveraging a Bayesian filter, we develop a receding-horizon optimization-based controller for the autonomous vehicle's decision-making, while counting for the uncertainties in interacting drivers' intentions. For online deployment, we design a neural network architecture based on the Attention mechanism that imitates the behavioral model with online estimated parameter priors. We propose a decision tree search algorithm to online solve the decision-making problem. The behavioral model is evaluated in the task of real-world trajectory prediction. We further conduct extensive evaluations of the proposed decision-making module, in forced highway merging scenarios, using both simulated environments and real-world traffic datasets. The results demonstrate our algorithms can complete the forced merging tasks in various traffic conditions while ensuring driving safety.

