---
title: "Control Invariant Sets for Neural Network Dynamical Systems and Recursive Feasibility in Model Predictive Control"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2025-12-24-TAC2025
---

<i><b>Xiao Li</b></i>, <a href="https://vodca.engin.umich.edu/" target="_blank" style="color:#7a8288;"><i>Anouck Girard</i></a>, <a href="https://sites.google.com/a/umich.edu/kolmanovsky/" target="_blank"  style="color:#7a8288;"><i>Ilya Kolmanovsky</i></a>  

Neural networks are powerful tools for data-driven modeling of complex dynamical systems, enhancing predictive capability for control applications. However, their inherent nonlinearity and black-box nature challenge control designs that prioritize rigorous safety and recursive feasibility guarantees. This paper presents algorithmic methods for synthesizing control invariant sets specifically tailored to neural network based dynamical models. These algorithms employ set recursion, ensuring termination after finite iterations and generating subsets in which closed-loop dynamics are forward invariant, thus guaranteeing perpetual operational safety. Additionally, we propose model predictive control designs that integrate these control invariant sets into mixed-integer optimization, with guaranteed adherence to safety constraints and recursive feasibility. Furthermore, we present a comprehensive theoretical analysis examining the properties and guarantees of the proposed methods. Numerical simulations in an autonomous driving scenario demonstrate the methods' effectiveness in synthesizing control-invariant sets offline and implementing model predictive control online, ensuring safety and recursive feasibility.

<!-- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -->
<hr>
<b>Adaptive Cruise Control using CT-MPC + Deep Ensemble (in-distribution perception):</b> 

<div class="video-container">
    <iframe src='https://drive.google.com/file/d/1YPGItZn5PRgQeATHfLwK0BTdj8I2NMxj/preview' allowfullscreen allow="autoplay"></iframe>
</div>

Using the same simulation setting as in the training phase, the ego vehicle is initialized with an unsafe distance headway, and therefore our CT-MPC applies harder braking, compared to the baseline (see video below), to enforce greater safety cautiousness. After approximately 1 second, once it re-enters the safe zone, the lead vehicle begins to decelerate. Instead of attempting to maintain the set speed, the ego vehicle adapts its speed to follow that of the lead vehicle, while consistently maintaining a safe headway distance. The baseline (see video below) demonstrates similar behavior after the initial braking phase. In our method, the safety is formally supported by the probabilistic lower bound.

<!-- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -->
<script src="https://polyfill.io/v3/polyfill.min.js?features=es6"></script>
<script id="MathJax-script" async
  src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-mml-chtml.js">
</script>
<!-- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -->
<hr>
<b>Synthesizing Control Invariant Sets (CISs) with different settings: </b> 

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Settings</th>
    <th><p>Euler's identity: \( e^{i\pi} + 1 = 0 \)</p></th>
    <th>Country</th>
    <th>Country</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>
        <div class="video-container">
            <iframe src='https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ntSNNDwMMGsIStbsv-sdE_G2ow9J9V3I/preview' allowfullscreen allow="autoplay"></iframe>
        </div>
    </td>
    <td>Maria Anders</td>
    <td>Germany</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Centro comercial Moctezuma</td>
    <td>Francisco Chang</td>
    <td>Mexico</td>
  </tr>
</table>


<!-- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -->
